# Python Functions, Files, and Dictionaries
*Coursera | Python 3 Programming Specialization | Course 2*

## Week 2 : Dictionaries and Dictionary Accumulation
### 2.1. Dictionaries

The compound data types we have studied in detail so far — strings and lists — are sequential collections. This means that the items in the collection are ordered from left to right and they use integers as indices to access the values they contain. This also means that looking for a particular value requires scanning the many items in the list until you find the desired value.

Data can sometimes be organized more usefully by associating a key with the value we are looking for. For example, if you are asked for the page number for the start of chapter 5 in a large textbook, you might flip around the book looking for the chapter 5 heading. If the chapter number appears in the header or footer of each page, you might be able to find the page number fairly quickly but it’s generally easier and faster to go to the index page and see that chapter 5 starts on page 78.

This sort of direct look up of a value in Python is done with an object called a Dictionary. Dictionaries are a different kind of collection. They are Python’s built-in **mapping** type. A map is an unordered, associative collection. The association, or mapping, is from a **key**, which can be of any immutable type (e.g., the chapter name and number in the analogy above), to a **value** (the starting page number), which can be any Python data object. You’ll learn how to use these collections in the following chapter.

To provide an example of this new kind of datatype, we will create a dictionary to translate English words into Spanish. For this dictionary, the keys are strings and the values will also be strings.

One way to create a dictionary is to start with the empty dictionary and add **key-value pairs**. The empty dictionary is denoted `{}`.

```python
eng2sp = {}
eng2sp["one"] = "uno"
eng2sp["two"] = "dos"
eng2sp["three"] = "tres"
print(eng2sp)
```

**Output** :

```
{'one': 'uno', 'two': 'dos', 'three': 'tres'}
```

The first assignment creates an empty dictionary named `eng2sp`. The other assignments add new key-value pairs to the dictionary. The left hand side gives the dictionary and the key being associated. The right hand side gives the value being associated with that key. We can print the current value of the dictionary in the usual way. The key-value pairs of the dictionary are separated by commas. Each pair contains a key and a value separated by a colon.

The order of the pairs may not be what you expected. Python uses complex algorithms, designed for very fast access, to determine where the key-value pairs are stored in a dictionary. For our purposes we can think of this ordering as unpredictable.

Another way to create a dictionary is to provide a bunch of key-value pairs using the same syntax as the previous output.


```python
eng2sp = {"one" : "uno", "two" : "dos", "three" : "tres"}
print(eng2sp)
```

**Output** :

```
{'one': 'uno', 'two': 'dos', 'three': 'tres'}
```


It doesn’t matter what order we write the pairs. The values in a dictionary are accessed with keys, not with indices, so there is no need to care about ordering.

Here is how we use a key to look up the corresponding value.

```python
eng2sp = {"three" : "tres", "one" : "uno", "two" : "dos"}
value = eng2sp["two"]
print(value)
print(eng2sp["one"])
```

**Output** :

```
dos
uno
```

----
----

**Check Your Understanding**

**Q1** : A dictionary is an unordered collection of key-value pairs.

A. False <br>
B. True ✅ <br>

----

**Q2** : What is printed by the following statements?

```python
mydict = {"cat" : 12, "dog" : 6, "elephant" : 23}
print(mydict["dog"])
```

A. 12 <br>
B. 6 ✅ <br>
C. 23 <br>
D. Error, you cannot use the index operator with a dictionary. <br>

----

**Q3** : Create a dictionary that keeps track of the USA’s Olympic medal count. Each key of the dictionary should be the type of medal (gold, silver, or bronze) and each key’s value should be the number of that type of medal the USA’s won. Currently, the USA has 33 gold medals, 17 silver, and 12 bronze. Create a dictionary saved in the variable `medals` that reflects this information.

```python
medals = {"gold": 33, "silver": 17, "bronze": 12}
print(medals)
print(medals["silver"])
```

**Output** :

```
{'gold': 33, 'silver': 17, 'bronze': 12}
17
```

----

**Q4** : You are keeping track of olympic medals for Italy in the 2016 Rio Summer Olympics! At the moment, Italy has 7 gold medals, 8 silver metals, and 6 bronze medals. Create a dictionary called `olympics` where the keys are the types of medals, and the values are the number of that type of medals that Italy has won so far.


```python
olympics = {"gold" : 7,
						"silver" : 8,
						"bronze" : 6}
print(olympics)
print(olympics["gold"])
```

**Output** :

```
{'gold': 7, 'silver': 8, 'bronze': 6}
7
```

----
