# Python Functions, Files, and Dictionaries
*Coursera | Python 3 Programming Specialization | Course 2*

## Week 3 : Functions and Tuples
### 3.11. Tuple Assignment with Unpacking

Python has a very powerful **tuple assignment** feature that allows a tuple of variable names on the left of an assignment statement to be assigned values from a tuple on the right of the assignment. Another way to think of this is that the tuple of values is **unpacked** into the variable names.

```python
julia = "Julia", "Roberts", 1967, "Duplicity", 2009, "Actress", "Atlanta, Georgia"

name, surname, birth_year, movie, movie_year, profession, birth_place = julia

print(name, surname, birth_year, profession)
print(movie, movie_year)
```

**Output**:

```
Julia Roberts 1967 Actress
Duplicity 2009
```

This does the equivalent of seven assignment statements, all on one easy line. One requirement is that the number of variables on the left must match the number of elements in the tuple.

Once in a while, it is useful to swap the values of two variables. With conventional assignment statements, we have to use a temporary variable. For example, to swap `a` and `b`:


```python
a = 1
b = 2
temp = a
a = b
b = temp

print(a, b, temp)
```

**Output**:

```
2 1 1
```

Tuple assignment solves this problem neatly:

```python
a = 1
b = 2
(a,b) = (b,a)
print(a,b)
```

**Output**:

```
2 1
```

The left side is a tuple of variables; the right side is a tuple of values. Each value is assigned to its respective variable. All the expressions on the right side are evaluated before any of the assignments. This feature makes tuple assignment quite versatile.

Naturally, the number of variables on the left and the number of values on the right have to be the same.

```python
(a, b, c, d) = (1, 2, 3) # ValueError: need more than 3 values to unpack

(a, b, c, d) = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) # ValueError: need more 5 variable

(a, b, c, d) = (1, 2, 3, 4) # Works fine
```

Earlier we were demonstrating how to use tuples as return values when calculating the area and circumference of a circle. Here we can unpack the return values after calling the function.

```python
def circle_info(r):
	"""Return (circumference, area) of a circle of radius r"""
	c = 2 * 3.14159 * r
	a = 3.14159 * r * r
	return c, a

print(circle_info(10))

circumference, area = circle_info(10)
print(circumference)
print(area)

circumference_two, area_two = circle_info(45)
print(circumference_two)
print(area_two)
```

**Output**:

```
(62.8318, 314.159)
62.8318
314.159
282.74309999999997
6361.719749999999
```

Python even provides a way to pass a single tuple to a function and have it be unpacked for assignment to the named parameters.

```python
def add(x, y):
	return x + y

print(add(3,4))

z = (5,4)
print(add(*z))

print(add(z))		# this line causes error because lack of * symbol
```

**Output**:

```
7
9
TypeError: add() takes exactly 2 arguments (1 given) on line 7
```

If you run this, you will be get an error caused by line 7, where it says that the function add is expecting two parameters, but you’re only passing one parameter (a tuple). In line 6 you’ll see that the tuple is unpacked and 5 is bound to x, 4 to y.

Don’t worry about mastering this idea yet. But later in the course, if you come across some code that someone else has written that uses the * notation inside a parameter list, come back and look at this again.

**Note** : Unpacking into multiple variable names also works with lists, or any other sequence type, as long as there is exactly one value for each variable. For example, you can write `x, y = [3, 4]`.

#### Unpacking Into Iterator Variables

Multiple assignment with unpacking is particularly useful when you iterate through a list of tuples or lists.

For example, a dictionary consists of key-value pairs. When you call the `items()` method on a dictionary, you get back a sequence of key-value pairs. Each of those pairs is a two-item tuple. (More generally, we refer to any two-item tuple as a pair). You can iterate over the key-value pairs.


```python
d = {"k1": 3, "k2": 7, "k3": "some other value"}

for p in d.items():
	print("key: {}, value: {}".format(p[0], p[1]))
```

**Output**:

```
key: k1, value: 3
key: k2, value: 7
key: k3, value: some other value
```

Each time line 4 is executed, p will refer to one key-value pair from d. A pair is just a tuple, so p[0] refers to the key and p[1] refers to the value.

That code is easier to read if we unpack the key-value pairs into two variable names.


```python
d = {"k1": 3, "k2": 7, "k3": "some other value"}

for k, v in d.items():
	print("key: {}, value: {}".format(k, v))
```

**Output**:

```
key: k1, value: 3
key: k2, value: 7
key: k3, value: some other value
```

More generally, if you have a list of tuples that each has more than two items, and you iterate through them with a for loop pulling out information from the tuples, the code will be far more readable if you unpack them into separate variable names right after the word `for`.

----
----

**Check Your Understanding**

**Q1** : If you want a function to return two values, contained in variables x and y, which of the following methods will work?

A. Make the last two lines of the function be "return x" and "return y" <br>
B. Include the statement "return [x, y]" ✅<br>
C. Include the statement "return (x, y)" ✅<br>
D. Include the statement "return x, y" ✅<br>
E. It's not possible to return two values; make two functions that each compute one value. <br>

----

**Q2** : Consider the following alternative way to swap the values of variables x and y. What’s wrong with it?


```python
# assume x and y already have values assigned to them
y = x
x = y
```

A. You can't use different variable names on the left and right side of an assignment statement. <br>
B. At the end, x still has it's original value instead of y's original value. ✅ <br>
C. Actually, it works just fine! <br>

----


**Q3** : With only one line of code, assign the variables water, fire, electric, and grass to the values “Squirtle”, “Charmander”, “Pikachu”, and “Bulbasaur”

```python
water, fire, electric, grass = "Squirtle", "Charmander", "Pikachu", "Bulbasaur"

print(water)
print(grass)
```

**Output** :

```
Squirtle
Bulbasaur
```

----

**Q4** : With only one line of code, assign four variables, `v1`, `v2`, `v3`, and `v4`, to the following four values: 1, 2, 3, 4.

```python
v1, v2, v3, v4 = 1, 2, 3, 4

print(v1)
print(v3)
```

**Output** :

```
1
3
```

----

**Q5** : If you remember, the `.items()` dictionary method produces a sequence of tuples. Keeping this in mind, we have provided you a dictionary called `pokemon`. For every key value pair, append the key to the list `p_names`, and append the value to the list `p_number`. Do not use the `.keys()` or `.values()` methods.

```python
# Given
pokemon = {'Rattata': 19, 'Machop': 66, 'Seel': 86, 'Volbeat': 86, 'Solrock': 126}


# Solution
p_names = []
p_number = []

for k, v in pokemon.items():
	p_names.append(k)
	p_number.append(v)

print(p_names)
print(p_number)
```

**Output** :

```
['Rattata', 'Machop', 'Seel', 'Volbeat', 'Solrock']
[19, 66, 86, 86, 126]
```

----


**Q6** : The `.items()` method produces a sequence of key-value pair tuples. With this in mind, write code to create a list of keys from the dictionary `track_medal_counts` and assign the list to the variable name `track_events`. Do NOT use the `.keys()` method.

```python
# Given
track_medal_counts = {'shot put': 1,
										'long jump': 3,
										'100 meters': 2,
										'400 meters': 2,
										'100 meter hurdles': 3,
										'triple jump': 3,
										'steeplechase': 2,
										'1500 meters': 1,
										'5K': 0, '10K': 0,
										'marathon': 0,
										'200 meters': 0,
										'400 meter hurdles': 0,
										'high jump': 1}



# Solution
track_events = []

for k, v in track_medal_counts.items():
	track_events.append(k)

print(track_events)
```

**Output** :

```
['shot put', 'long jump', '100 meters', '400 meters', '100 meter hurdles', 'triple jump', 'steeplechase', '1500 meters', '5K', '10K', 'marathon', '200 meters', '400 meter hurdles', 'high jump']
```

----
