# Python Functions, Files, and Dictionaries
*Coursera | Python 3 Programming Specialization | Course 2*

## Week 3 : Functions and Tuples
### 3.9. Mutable Objects and Side Effects

As you have seen, when a function (or method) is invoked and a parameter value is provided, a new stack frame is created, and the parameter name is bound to the parameter value. What happens when the value that is provided is a mutable object, like a list or dictionary? Is the parameter name bound to a copy of the original object, or does it become an alias for exactly that object? In python, the answer is that it becomes an alias for the original object. This answer matters when the code block inside the function definition causes some change to be made to the object (e.g., adding a key-value pair to a dictionary or appending to a list).

This sheds a little different light on the idea of parameters being local. They are local in the sense that if you have a parameter x inside a function and there is a global variable x, any reference to x inside the function gets you the value of local variable x, not the global one. If you set `x = 3`, it changes the value of the local variable x, but when the function finishes executing, that local x disappears, and so does the value 3.

If, one the other hand, the local variable x points to a list `[1, 3, 7]`, setting `x[2] = 0` makes x still point to the same list, but changes the list’s contents to [1, 3, 0]. The local variable x is discarded when the function completes execution, but the mutation to the list lives on if there is some other variable outside the function that also is an alias for the same list.

Consider the following example.

```python
def double(y):
	y = 2 * y

def changeit(lst):
	lst[0] = "Michigan"
	lst[1] = "Wolverines"

y = 5
double(y)
print(y)

mylst = ["our", "students", "are", "awesome"]
print(mylst)
changeit(mylst)
print(mylst)
```

**Output**:

```
5
['our', 'students', 'are', 'awesome']
['Michigan', 'Wolverines', 'are', 'awesome']
```

Try running it. Similar to examples we have seen before, running `double` does not change the global y. But running `changeit` does change `mylst`. The explanation is above, about the sharing of mutable objects.


We say that the function `changeit` has a **side effect** on the list object that is passed to it. Global variables are another way to have side effects. For example, similar to examples you have seen above, we could make `double` have a side effect on the global variable y.

```python
def double(n):
	global y
	y = 2 * n

y = 5
print(y)

double(y)
print(y)
```

**Output**:

```
5
10
```

Side effects are sometimes convenient. For example, it may be convenient to have a single dictionary that accumulates information, and pass it around to various functions that might add to it or modify it.

However, programs that have side effects can be very difficult to debug. When an object has a value that is not what you expected, it can be difficult to track down exactly where in the code it was set. Wherever it is practical to do so, it is best to avoid side effects. The way to avoid using side effects is to use return values instead.

Instead of modifying a global variable inside a function, pass the global variable’s value in as a parameter, and set that global variable to be equal to a value returned from the function. For example, the following is a better version of the code above.

```python
def double(n):
	y = 2 * n

y = 5
print(y)

y = double(y)
print(y)
```

**Output**:

```
5
10
```

You can use the same coding pattern to avoid confusing side effects with sharing of mutable objects. To do that, explicitly make a copy of an object and pass the copy in to the function. Then return the modified copy and reassign it to the original variable if you want to save the changes. The built-in `list` function, which takes a sequence as a parameter and returns a new list, works to copy an existing list. For dictionaries, you can similarly call the `dict` function, passing in a dictionary to get a copy of the dictionary back as a return value.

```python
def change_it(alist):
	blist = alist[:]
	blist[0] = "Michigan"
	blist[1] = "Wolverines"
	return blist

my_list = ["106", "students", "are", "awesome"]
new_list = change_it(my_list)
print(my_list)
print(new_list)
```

**Output**:

```
['106', 'students', 'are', 'awesome']
['Michigan', 'Wolverines', 'are', 'awesome']
```

In general, any lasting effect that occurs in a function, not through its return value, is called a side effect. There are three ways to have side effects:

* Printing out a value. This doesn’t change any objects or variable bindings, but it does have a potential lasting effect outside the function execution, because a person might see the output and be influenced by it.
* Changing the value of a mutable object.
* Changing the binding of a global variable.

----
----
