# 1.2 Chapter Two: Variables, Expressions, and Statements
*Course 01 : Getting Started With Python*

## Constants

A *value* is one of the basic things in a program works with like a letter or a number such as "1", "5.8" or "Hello world!"

**Fixed values** such as numbers, letters, and strings are called "constants" because their value does not change. Numeric constants are as you expect. The value of 1 is always 1. 



String constants use single quotes `(' ')` or double quotes `("")`

```python
# Constant examples
print(123)            # Output : 123
print(98.6)           # Output : 98.6
print("Hello world")  # Output : Hello world
```

<br>

## Variables 
A **variable** is a named place in the memory where a programmer can store data and later retrieve the data using the variable "name". Programmers get to choose the names of the variables. You can define any information, number or data on a variable to be valid within the entire program. When it defines a variable, the program uses the data you assign to each variable. Variables are not fixed as constants, they can change later in the program.

```python
# Variable examples
message = "And now for something completely different"
pi = 3.1415926535897931
print(pi)               # Output : 3.1415926535897931

x = 12.2
y = 14
print(x)                # Output : 12.2

x = 100
print(x)                # Output : 100
```

<br>

### Python Variable Name Rules 

In Python, we have many options when determining the variable name. Apart from Reserved Words, we can choose almost every name we want. 

You can start with letters or underline when selecting names. However, it is usually recommended that the programming language should not start with an underscore when choosing names, because the program uses this sign for some operations within itself so errors may be encountered. 

Numbers may be included in the name to be selected, but starting with a number may cause problems, so it should not be preferred. 

One of the points to be considered in Python's name selection is the use of upper and lower cases. Because Python is a case-sensitive program, `spam` and` SPAM` is different for it. For this reason, except in special cases, it is recommended to select names with lowercase.

Below we can see how Python reacts to different names. 


```python
Good :        spam      eggs      spam23      _speed
Bad  :        23spam    #sign     var.12
Different :   spam      Spam      SPAM
```
<br>

**Mnemonic Technic**

Determining the variable name in Python is essential to work efficiently on the program. Python does not look at the logic of the selected names, but only wants each variable to have a unique name. However, it is important that the names are logical and rememberable when working backward on the program or when others need to work on your codes. 

Let's examine the following examples.

```python
# Same calculation in different name example
# Non-mnemonic name -1-
x1q3z9ocd = 35.0
x1q3z9afd = 12.50
x1q3p9afd = x1q3z9ocd * x1q3z9afd
print(x1q3p9afd)

# Non-mnemonic name -2-
a = 35.0
b = 12.50
c = a * b
print(c)

# Mnemonic name  -3-
hours = 35.0
rate = 12.50
pay = hours * rate
print(pay)
```
The Python interpreter sees all three of these programs as exactly the same but humans see and understand these programs quite differently. Humans will most quickly understand the intent of the second program because the programmer has chosen variable names that reflect their intent regarding what data will be stored in each variable.

We call these wisely chosen variable names "mnemonic variable names". The word mnemonic means "memory aid". We choose mnemonic variable names to help us remember why we created the variable in the first place. Mnemonic variable names can get in the way of a beginning programmer's ability to parse and understand code. 

<br>

**Assignment Statements**
A *statement* is a unit of code that Python interpreter can execute. A script usually contains a sequence of statements. 

We assign a value to a variable using the assignment statement (=)

An assignment statement consists of an **expression on the right-hand side** and a variable to store the result

```python
x = 3.9 * x * (1 - x)     # All things after the = is value of x
```

A variable is a memory location used to store a value. The value stored in a variable can be updated bu replacing the old value with the new value. The right side is an expression. Once the expression is evaluated, the result is placed in (assigned to) the variable on the left side. 

```python
# Updating the value of a variable
x = 0.6
print(x)                # Output : 0.6
x = 3.9 * x * (1 - x)   # New value = 3.9 * 0.6 * (1 - 0.6)
print(x)                # Output : 0.936
```

<br>

## Numeric Expressions 
Because of the lack of mathematical symbols on computer keyboards - we use "computer-speak" to express the classic math operations. It calls numeric expressions. Numeric expressions allow us to do four operations, and Python can process them all without having to make a custom definition.

Operators are special symbols that represent computations like addition and multiplication. And an expression is a combination of values, variables, and operators.


Operator|Operation
|:---:|---|
+|Addition
-|Subtraction
*|Multiplication
/|Division
**|Power
%|Remainder


```python
# Numeric expressions
xx = 2
xx = xx + 2
print(xx)           # Output : 4

yy = 440 * 12
print(yy)           # Output : 5280

zz = yy / 1000
print(zz)           # Output : 5.28

jj = 23
kk = jj % 5
print(kk)           # Output : 3 (Because 3 is the remainder of division)

print(4 ** 3)       # Output : 64
```

<br>

### Order of evaluation
For mathematical operators, Python follows mathematical convention. When we string operators together Python must know which one to do first. This is colled **operator precedence**. 

**Operator Precedence Rules**

Highest precedence rule to lowest presedence rule :

* Parantheses are always respected
* Exponentiation (raise to a power)
* Multiplication, division, and remainder
* Addition and substraction
* Left to righ


It should be noted that the correct formulas will change the results as shown below. 

```python
# Precedence examples
x = 1 + 2 ** 3 / 4 * 5
print(x)                      # Output : 11.0

x = 1 + ((2 ** 3) / (4 * 5))
print(x)                      # Output : 1.4

x = 1 + (((2 ** 3) / 4) * 5)
print(x)                      # Output : 11.0

x = 1 + (2 * 3) - (4 / (5 ** 6))
print(x)                      # Output : 6.999744
```

The `+` operator works with strings, but it is not addition in the mathematical sense. Instead it performs concatenation, which means joining the strings by linking them end to end. 

```python
first = 10
second = 15
print(first + second)       # Output : 25

first = "10"
second = "15"
print(first + second)       # Output : 1015
```

The `*` operator also works with strings by multiplying the content of a string by an integer.

```python
first = "Test"
second = 3
print(first * second)       # Output : TestTestTest
```
<br>

## Types
In Python variables, literals, and constants have a "type". Python knows the difference between an integer number and a string. For example `+` means addition if something is a number and concatenate if something is a string

```python
ddd = 1 + 4 
print(ddd)            # Output : 5

eee = "hello " + "there"
print(eee)            # Output : hello there
```

In the example above, there is a space where `hello` is written. When combining scripts, Python does not put any space on itself, so you need to pay attention to it. Otherwise, the result will be as follows.

```python
aaa = "hello" + "world"
print(aaa)            # Output : helloworld

bbb = "hello " + "world"
print(bbb)            # Output : hello world
```

In the example below, after the line `eee = eee + 1` Python gives an error because it does not know what to do with a `+` operation with a string. That's why we need to tell it the type of each one in the process, just as it goes on. We can ask Python what type something is by using the `type()` function. 

```python
eee = "hello " + "there"
eee = eee + 1
# Output : Traceback (most recent call last) : File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>TypeError: Cant convert "int" object to str implicitly

type(eee)       # Output : <class"str">

type("hello")   # Output : <class"str">

type(1)         # Output : <class"int">
```

#### Several Types of Numbers
Numbers have two main types : 
  * **Integers** are whole numbers : -15, -2, 0, 1, 100, 9038
  * **Floating Point Numbers** have decimal parts : -2.5, 0.0, 98.6, 14.0
  
There are other number types. They are variations on float and integer

```python
xx = 1
type(xx)        # Output : <class"int">

temp = 98.6
type(temp)      # Output : <class"float">

type(1)         # Output : <class"int">

type(1.0)       # Output : <class"float">
```
 
<br>

#### Type Conversions
For Python, `99` is not the same as` 99.0`. The program sees the first of these numbers as an integer and the other as a decimal number, so the two are different. We need to pay attention to this when programming. It is possible to convert types into each other when we need them. As in the example below, when we use the `float (..)` command, we are forced to write it as a decimal number. You can control this with the built `int()` and `float()` 


```python
print(float(99) + 100)      # Output : 199.0

i = 42
type(i)                     # Output : <class"int"> 

f = float(i) 
print(f)                    # Output : 42.0

type(f)                     # Output : <clas"float">
```

<br> 

#### Integer Division
When dividing in Python 2, for example, in 9/2 operation, it would output 4 as a result, and if you didn't specify it in the code, it would throw the decimal part, but in Python 3 it started to do it automatically and removed the weights in the codes.


```python
print(10 / 2)             # Output : 5.0
print(5 / 2)              # Output : 4.5
print(99 / 100)           # Output : 0.99
print(10.0 / 2.0)         # Output : 5.0
print(99.0 / 100.0)       # Output : 0.99
```

#### String Conversions 
If we set a constant content of the number, we can write the numbers directly after the `=` part, but we include it as a string when we write it in `" "`. You can also use `int()` and `float()`to convert between strings and integers. If the string does not contain numeric characters you will get an error.


```python
sval = "123"
type(sval)              # Output : <class "str">

print(sval + 1)         # Output : Traceback (most recent call last): File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module> TypeError: Can't convert "int" object to str impicitly

ival = int(sval)
type(ival)              # Output : <class "int">

print(ival + 1)         # Output : 124

nsv = "hello bob"
niv = int(nsv)          # Traceback (most recent call last): File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module> ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: "x"
```

In the example below you can see how we can manipulate types.

```python
word = "123"
type(word)            # Output : <class "str">

print(word + 1)       # Traceback (most recent call last): File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module> TypeError: must be str, not int

number = int(word)
type(number)              # Output : <class "int">

print(number + 1)         # Output : 124
```

<br>

## User input 
Sometimes we would like to take the value for a variable from the user via their keyboard. Python provides a built-in function called `input()` that gets input from the keyboard. When this function is called, the program stops and waits for the user to type something. When the user presses Return or Enter, the program resumes and input returns what the user typed as a string.


```python
nam = input("Who are you?")     # Output : Who are you? 
                                # User Answer : Chuck
print("Welcome", nam)           # Output : Welcome Chuck
```


## Comments in Python
As programs get bigger and more complicated, they get more difficult to read. Formal languages are dense, and it is often difficult to look at a piece of code and figure out what it is doing, or why. For this reason, it is a good idea to add notes to your programs to explain in natural language what the program is doing. For writing a comment, we use `#` symbol. Everything from the `#` to the end of the line is ignored; it has no effect on the program.

Why comment? 
  * Describe what is going to happen in a sequence of code 
  * Document who wrote the code or other ancillary information
  * Turn off a line of code - perhaps temporarily


```python
# Get the name of the file and open it
name = input("Enter file:")
handle = open(name, "r")

# Count word frequency
counts = dict()
for line in handle :
  words = line.split()
  for word in words :
    counts[word] = counts.get(word,0) + 1

# Find the most common word 
bigcount = None
bigword = None
for word, count in counts.items() :
  if bigcount is None or count > bigcount :
    bigword = word
    bigcount = count

# All done
print(bigword, bigcount)
```

#### Converting user input 
In this little example, we are writing a small application that handles the data we receive from the user. If we want to read a number from the user, we must convert it from a string to a number using a type conversion function.


```python
# Convert elevator floors
inp = input("Europe floor?")    # Output : Europe floor? / User answer : 0
usf = int(inp) + 1
print("US floor", usf)          # Output : US floor 1
```
