# 2.2 Chapter Seven - Files
## Opening a File
When we want to read or write a file (say on your hard drive), we first must open the file. Opening the file communicates with your operating system, which knows where the data for each file is stored. When you open a file, you are asking the operating system to find the file by name and make sure the file exists.

A text file can be thought of as a sequence of lines

```
From stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za Sat Jan  5 09:14:16 2008
Return-Path: <postmaster@collab.sakaiproject.org>
Received: from murder (mail.umich.edu [141.211.14.90])
	 by frankenstein.mail.umich.edu (Cyrus v2.3.8) with LMTPA;
	 Sat, 05 Jan 2008 09:14:16 -0500
```

Before we can read the contents of the file, we must tell Python which file we are going to work with and we will be doing with the file. This is done with the `open()` function. **open( )** returns a "file handle" - a variable used to perform operations on the file. Filename is a string.

In this example, we open the file mbox.txt, which should be stored in the same folder that you are in when you start Python.
You can download this file from www.py4e.com/code3/mbox.txt

##### `handle = open(filename, mode)` ==> `fhand = open("mbox.txt", "r")`

If the open is successful, the operating system returns us a file handle. The file handle is not the actual data contained in the file, but instead it is a "handle" that we can use to read the data. You are given a handle if the requested file exists and you have the proper permissions to read the file. If the file does not exist, open will fail with a traceback and you will not get a handle to access the contents of the file

This can be specified as **mode** read or write in the line of code. If left blank, the program automatically runs in read mode.

The file name is always a string.


#### What's a Handle?

```python
fhand = open("mbox.txt")
print(fhand)

# Output
<_io.TextIOWrapper name='mbox.txt' mode='r' encoding='UTF-8'>
```
It does not print the contents of the text file in a code snippet as above. It prints what the "fhand" specified file is.

## The Newline Character
To break the file into lines, there is a special character that represents the "end of the line" called the newline character. We use the **newline** to indicate when a line ends.

In Python, we represent the newline character as a backslash-n in string constants. Even though this looks like two characters, it is actually a single character. When we look at the variable by entering "stuff" in the interpreter, it shows us the \n in the string, but when we use `print` to show the string, we see the string broken into two lines by the newline character.


```Python
stuff = "Hello\nWorld"
print(stuff)
# Output :
# Hello
# World

stuff = "X\nY"
print(stuff)
# Output :
# X
# Y

print(len(stuff))
# Output
# 3
```

## File Handle as a sequence
A file handle open for read can be treated as a sequence of strings where each line in the file is a string in the sequence. We can use the **for** statement to iterate through a sequence. Remember a sequence is an ordered set.

```Python
xfile = open("mbox.txt")
for cheese in xfile:
	print(cheese)
```


## Counting Lines in a File
While the file handle does not contain the data for the file, it is quite easy to construct a for loop to read through and count each of the lines in a file.

We can use the file handle as the sequence in our for loop. Our for loop simply counts the number of lines in the file and prints them out. The rough translation of the for loop into English is, "for each line in the file represented by the file handle, add one to the count variable."

The reason that the open function does not read the entire file is that the file might be quite large with many gigabytes of data. The open statement takes the same amount of time regardless of the size of the file. The for loop actually causes the data to be read from the file.

When the file is read using a for loop in this manner, Python takes care of splitting the data in the file into separate lines using the newline character. Python reads each line through the newline and includes the newline as the last character in the line variable for each iteration of the for loop.

Because the for loop reads the data one line at a time, it can efficiently read and count the lines in very large files without running out of main memory to store the data. The above program can count the lines in any size file using very little memory since each line is read, counted, and then discarded.

```python
fhand = open("mbox.txt")
count = 0
for line in fhand:
	count = count + 1
print("Line Count:", count)

# Output :
# Line Count: 132045
```

## Readind the Whole File
If you know the file is relatively small compared to the size of your main memory, you can read the whole file into one string using the read method on the file handle. We can read the whole file (newlines and all) into a single string.

```python
fhand = open("mbox-short.txt")
inp = fhand.read()
print(len(inp))
# Output : 94626

print(inp[:20])
# Output : From stephen.marquar
```
In this example, the entire contents (all 94,626 characters) of the file mbox-short.txt are read directly into the variable inp. We use string slicing to print out the first 20 characters of the string data stored in inp.

When the file is read in this manner, all the characters including all of the lines and newline characters are one big string in the variable inp. It is a good idea to store the output of read as a variable because each call to read exhausts the resource:

```Python
fhand = open('mbox-short.txt')
print(len(fhand.read()))
# Output : 94626
print(len(fhand.read()))
# Output : 0
```

Remember that this form of the open function should only be used if the file data will fit comfortably in the main memory of your computer. If the file is too large to fit in main memory, you should write your program to read the file in chunks using a for or while loop.


## Searching Through a File
When you are searching through data in a file, it is a very common pattern to read through a file, ignoring most of the lines and only processing lines which meet a particular condition. We can combine the pattern for reading a file with string methods to build simple search mechanisms. We can put an **if** statement in our **for** loop to only print lines that meet some criteria.

```Python
fhand = open("mbox-short.txt")
for line in fhand:
	if line.startswith("From:"):
		print(line)

# Output :
From: stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za

From: louis@media.berkeley.edu

From: zqian@umich.edu

From: rjlowe@iupui.edu
...
```
The output looks great since the only lines we are seeing are those which start with "From:", but why are we seeing the extra blank lines? This is due to that invisible newline character. Each of the lines ends with a newline, so the print statement prints the string in the variable line which includes a newline and then print adds another newline, resulting in the double spacing effect we see.

We could use line slicing to print all but the last character, but a simpler approach is to use the rstrip method which strips whitespace from the right side of a string as follows.

```python
fhand = open(mbox-short.txt)
for line in fhand:
	line = line.rstrip()
	if line.startswith("From:"):
		print(line)

# Output :
From: stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za
From: louis@media.berkeley.edu
From: zqian@umich.edu
From: rjlowe@iupui.edu
From: zqian@umich.edu
...
```

## Skipping with continue
As your file processing programs get more complicated, you may want to structure your search loops using continue. The basic idea of the search loop is that you are looking for "interesting" lines and effectively skipping "uninteresting" lines. And then when we find an interesting line, we do something with that line.

We can structure the loop to follow the pattern of skipping uninteresting lines.

```python
fhand = open("mbox-short.txt")
for line in fhand:
	line = line.rstrip()
	if not line.startswith("From:"):
		continue
	print(line)

# Output :
From: stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za
From: louis@media.berkeley.edu
From: zqian@umich.edu
From: rjlowe@iupui.edu
From: zqian@umich.edu
...
```

The output of the program is the same. In English, the uninteresting lines are those which do not start with "From:", which we skip using continue. For the "interesting" lines (i.e., those that start with "From:") we perform the processing on those lines.


## Using in to Select lines
We can use the find string method to simulate a text editor search that finds lines where the search string is anywhere in the line. Since find looks for an occurrence of a string within another string and either returns the position of the string or -1 if the string was not found, we can write the following loop to show lines which contain the string "@uct.ac.za"

```python
fhand = open("mbox-short.txt")
for line in fhand:
	line = line.rstrip()
	if not "@uct.ac.za" in line:
		continue
	print(line)

# Output
From stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za Sat Jan  5 09:14:16 2008
X-Authentication-Warning: nakamura.uits.iupui.edu: apache set sender to stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za using -f
From: stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za
Author: stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za
From david.horwitz@uct.ac.za Fri Jan  4 07:02:32 2008
X-Authentication-Warning: nakamura.uits.iupui.edu: apache set sender to...
```

## Prompt for File Name
We really do not want to have to edit our Python code every time we want to process a different file. It would be more usable to ask the user to enter the file name string each time the program runs so they can use our program on different files without changing the Python code.

This is quite simple to do by reading the file name from the user using input. We read the file name from the user and place it in a variable named fname and open that file. Now we can run the program repeatedly on different files.

```python
fname = input("Enter the file name: ")
fhand = open(fname)
count = 0
for line in fhand:
	if line.startswith("Subject:"):
		count = count + 1
print("There were", count, "subject line in", fname)

# Output 1
Enter the file name: mbox.txt
There were 1797 subject line in mbox.txt

# Output 2
Enter the file name: mbox-short.txt
There were 27 subject line in mbox-short.txt
```


## Bad File Names
What if our user types something that is not a file name? Users will eventually do every possible thing they can do to break your programs, either on purpose or with malicious intent. We can elegantly fix it using the try/except structure. We need to assume that the open call might fail and add recovery code when the open fails.

```python
fname = input("Enter the file name: ")
try :
	fhand = open(fhand)
except:
	print("File cannot be opened:", fname)
	quit()

count = 0
for line in fhand:
	if line.startswith("Subject:"):
		count = count + 1
print("There were", count, "subject line in", fname)

# Output
Enter the file name: mbox.txte
File cannot be opened: mbox.txte
```
