# 2.3 Chapter Eight - Lists

## Programming
**Algorithms**

Algorithms are the paths that we call, write code to go to certain paths.

A set of rules or steps used to solve a problem.


**Data Structures**

A particular way of organizing data in a computer.

The design of your data structures and your variables, how you orginize your data while your program is running can help you solve a problem. Lists, dictionaries and tulpes are the first three data structures in this lesson.


## Collection

**What is not a collection?**
Most of our variables have one value in them - when we put a new value in the variable, the old value is overwritten.

```python
x = 2
x = 4
print(x)

# Output : 4
```

**What is a collection?**
A list is a kind of collection.

A collection is allows us to put many values in a single variable.

A collection is nice because we can carry many values around in one convenient package.

```python
friends = ["Joseph", "Glenn", "Sally"]
carryon = ["socks", "shirt", "perfume"]
```


## List Constants
Like a string, a list is a sequence of values. In a string, the values are characters; in a list, they can be any type or even another list. The values in list are called elements or sometimes items but also a list can be emtpy.

There are several ways to create a new list; the simplest is to enclose the elements in square brackets ("[" and "]") so list constants are surrounded by square brackets and the elements in the list are seperated by commas.


```python
print([1, 24, 76])									# Output : [1, 24, 76]
print(["red", "yellow", "blue"])		# Output : ['red', 'yellow', 'blue']
print(["red", 24, 98.6])						# Output : ['red', 24, 98.6]
print([1, [5, 6], 7])								# Output : [1, [5, 6], 7]
print([])														# Output : []
```
The first example is a list of three integers.

The second is a list of three strings.

The elements of a list don't have to be the same type. The following list contains a string, an integer, and a float.

The fourth list has three items, two integer and a list. In this example, there are 3 elements in the list. Although a list can contain another list, the nested list still counts as a single element.

The last list is empty list.


We studied with the list in previous lessons.
```python
for i in [5, 4, 3, 2, 1]:
	print(i)
print("Blastoff!")
```

## List and Definite Loops
The most common way to traverse the elements of a list is with a for loop. The syntax is the same as for strings. This works well if you only need to read the elements of the list.

```python
for cheese in cheeses:
    print(cheese)
```
The following two code snippets do the same job, but there is a difference between the names given to the lists. It makes no sense for Python to be able to work out that difference.

```python
friends = ["Joseph", "Glenn", "Sally"]
for friend in friends :
	print("Happy New Year", friend)
print("Done")
```

```python
z = ["Joseph", "Glenn", "Sally"]
for x in z :
	print("Happy New Year", x)
print("Done")
```

## Looking Inside Lists

Just like strings, we can get at any single element in a list using an index specified in square brackets.

Joseph | Glenn | Sally
--- | --- | ---
0 | 1 | 2

```python
friends = ["Joseph", "Glenn", "Sally"]
print(friends[1])
# Output : Glenn
```

## Lists Are Mutable
The syntax for accessing the elements of a list is the same as for accessing the characters of a string: the bracket operator. The expression inside the brackets specifies the index.

```python
cheeses = ['Cheddar', 'Edam', 'Gouda']
numbers = [17, 123]
empty = []
print(cheeses, numbers, empty)
# Output : ['Cheddar', 'Edam', 'Gouda'] [17, 123] []

print(cheeses[0])
# Output : Cheddar

numbers = [17, 123]
numbers[1] = 5
print(numbers)
# Output : [17, 5]
```

Strings are immutable we cannot change the contents of a string but lists are mutable so we can change an element of a list using the index operator even it has string on it.

```Python
fruit = "Banana"
fruit[0] = "b"
# Traceback
# TypeError: "str" object does not support item assignment

x = fruit.lower()
print(x)								# Output : banana

lotto = [2, 14, 26, 41, 63]
print(lotto)						# Output : [2, 14, 26, 41, 63]

lotto[2] = 28
print(lotto)						# Output : [2, 14, 28, 41, 63]
```


## How Long is a List?
List have lenght just like strings and we use the exact same function.

The `len()` function takes a list as a parameter and returns the number of elements in the list.

Actually `len()` tells us the number of elements of any set or sequence (such as a string...)

```python
greet = "Hello Bob"
print(len(greet))
# Output : 9

x = [1, 2, "joe", 99]
print(len(x))
# Output : 4
```


## Using the `range` Function
If we want to write or update the elements, we need the indices. A common way to do that is to combine the functions `range` and `len`.

This loop below traverses the list and updates each element. `len` returns the number of elements in the list. `range` returns a list of indices from 0 to n − 1, where n is the length of the list. Each time through the loop, `i` gets the index of the next element. The assignment statement in the body uses i to read the old value of the element and to assign the new value.

```python
numbers = [17, 123]
for i in range(len(numbers)):
    numbers[i] = numbers[i] * 2
print(numbers)
# Output : [34, 246]
```

The `range` function returns a list of numbers that range from zero to one less than parameter.

We can construct an index loop using for and an integer iterator.

```python
print(range(4))
# Output : range(0, 4)

friends = ["Joseph", "Glenn", "Sally"]
print(len(friends))
# Output : 3

print(range(len(friends)))
# Output : range(0, 3)
```


## A Tale of Two Loops

```python
friends = ["Joseph", "Glenn", "Sally"]

for friend in friends:
	print("Happy New Year:", friend)
	# Output
	# Happy New Year: Joseph
	# Happy New Year: Glenn
	# Happy New Year: Sally

for i in range(len(friends)):
	friend = friends[i]
	print("Happy New Year:", friend)
	# Output
	# Happy New Year: Joseph
	# Happy New Year: Glenn
	# Happy New Year: Sally
```


## Concatenating Lists Using +
We can create a new list by adding two existing lists together.

```python
a = [1, 2, 3]
b = [4, 5, 6]
c = a + b
print(c)
# Output : [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]

print(a)
# Output : [1, 2, 3]
```

Similarly, the * operator repeats a list a given number of times. The first example below repeats four times. The second example repeats the list three times.

```python
a = [0] * 4
print(a)
# Output : [0, 0, 0, 0]

b = [1, 2, 3] * 3
print(b)
# Output : [1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3]
```


## Lists Can be Sliced Using :
Just like in strings, the second number is "up to but not including". If you omit the first index, the slice starts at the beginning. If you omit the second, the slice goes to the end. So if you omit both, the slice is a copy of the whole list.

Since lists are mutable, it is often useful to make a copy before performing operations that fold, spindle, or mutilate lists.

```python
t = [9, 41, 12, 3, 74, 15]
print(t[1:3])
# Output : [41, 12]

print(t[:4])
# Output : [9, 41, 12, 3]

print(t[3:])
# Output : [3, 74, 15]

print(t[:])
# Output : [9, 41, 12, 3, 74, 15]
```


## Building a List from Scratch
Python provides methods that operate on lists. For example, `append` adds a new element to the end of a list. We can create an empty list and then elements using the append method. The list stays in order and new elements are added at the end of the list.

```python
stuff = list()
stuff.append("book")
stuff.append(99)
print(stuff)
# Output : ['book', 99]

stuff.append("cookie")
print(stuff)
# Output : ['book', 99, 'cookie']
```

Also `extend` takes a list as an argument and appends all of the elements.

```python
t1 = ['a', 'b', 'c']
t2 = ['d', 'e']
t1.extend(t2)
print(t1)
# Output : ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e']
```

## Deleting elements in a list
There are several ways to delete elements from a list. If you know the index of the element you want, you can use `pop`.
`pop` modifies the list and returns the element that was removed. If you don't provide an index, it deletes and returns the last element.

```python
t = ['a', 'b', 'c']
x = t.pop(1)
print(t)
# Output : ['a', 'c']

print(x)
# Output : b
```

If you don't need the removed value, you can use the `del` operator.

```python
t = ['a', 'b', 'c']
del t[1]
print(t)
# Output : ['a', 'c']
```

If you know the element you want to remove (but not the index), you can use `remove`.

```python
t = ['a', 'b', 'c']
t.remove('b')
print(t)
# Output : ['a', 'c']
```

To remove more than one element, you can use `del` with a slice index.

```python
t = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e', 'f']
del t[1:5]
print(t)
# Output : ['a', 'f']
```


## Is Something in a List?
Python provides two operators that let you check if an item is in a list. These are logical operators that return `True` or `False` and they do not modify the list.

```python
some = [1, 9, 21, 10, 16]
print(9 in some)
# Output : True
print(15 in some)
# Output : False
print(20 not in some)
# Output : True
```

## Lists are in Order
A list can hold many items and keeps those items in the order until we do something to change the order. `sort` arranges the elements of the list from low to high. The sort method unlike in strings means "sort yourself"

```python
friends = ["Joseph", "Glenn", "Sally"]
friends.sort()
print(friends)
# Output : ['Glenn', 'Joseph', 'Sally']

print(friends[1])
# Output : Joseph
```

## Built-in Functions and Lists
There are a number of built-in functions that can be used on lists that allow you to quickly look through a list without writing your own loops.

The `sum()` function only works when the list elements are numbers. The other functions like `max(), len()` work with lists of strings and other types that can be comparable.

Remember the loops we built? These are much simplier.

```python
nums = [3, 41, 12, 9, 74, 15]
print(len(nums))
# Output : 6
print(max(nums))
# Output : 74
print(min(nums))
# Output : 3
print(sum(nums))
# Output : 154
print(sum(nums) / len(nums))
# Output : 25.666666666666668
```

We could rewrite an earlier program that computed the average of a list of numbers entered by the user using a list. In the first one,loop version, the program to compute an average without a list. In this program, we have count and total variables to keep the number and running total of the user's numbers as we repeatedly prompt the user for a number.

```python
# Loop version
total = 0
count = 0
while True :
	inp = input("Enter a number: ")
	if inp == "done" : break
	value = float(inp)
	total = total + value
	count = count + 1
average = total / count
print("Average:", average)
# Output
# Enter a number: 2
# Enter a number: 3
# Enter a number: 4
# Enter a number: 5
# Enter a number: done
# Average: 3.5
```

We could simply remember each number as the user entered it and use built-in functions to compute the sum and count at the end. We make an empty list before the loop starts, and then each time we have a number, we append it to the list. At the end of the program, we simply compute the sum of the numbers in the list and divide it by the count of the numbers in the list to come up with the average.

```python
# List version
numlist = list()
while True :
	inp = input("Enter a number: ")
	if inp == "done" : break
	value = float(inp)
	numlist.append(value)
average = sum(numlist) / len(numlist)
print("Average:", average)
# Output
# Enter a number: 2
# Enter a number: 3
# Enter a number: 4
# Enter a number: 5
# Enter a number: done
# Average: 3.5

print(numlist)
# Output : [2, 3, 4, 5]
```

These two versions have a little difference. The loop version actually keeps one value only in memory for the `total` and` count` data. Because the cycle returns to the beginning of this data is refreshed and the old is deleted. In the list version, all numbers remain in memory, which means that they have bigger input operation. The list is useful when you need to keep the data available as a list, although the list takes up space in multi-data programs, but the loop version is the result-oriented data entry can't be returned.


## Best Friends : Strings and Lists
A string is a sequence of characters and a list is a sequence of values, but a list of characters is not the same as a string. To convert from a string to a list of characters, you can use `list`. The list function breaks a string into individual letters.

Because list is the name of a built-in function, you should avoid using it as a variable name.

```python
s = 'spam'
t = list(s)
print(t)
# Output : ['s', 'p', 'a', 'm']
```

If you want to break a string into words, you can use the `split` method.Once you have used split to break the string into a list of words, you can use the index operator (square bracket) to look at a particular word in the list.

```python
abc = "With three words"
stuff = abc.split()
print(stuff)
# Output : ['With', 'three', 'words']

print(len(stuff))
# Output : 3

print(stuff[0])
# Output : With

for w in stuff :
	print(w)
# Output :
# With
# three
# words
```

You can call split with an optional argument called a delimiter that specifies which characters to use as word boundaries.

```python
line = "A lot               of spaces"
etc = line.split()
print(etc)
# Output : ['A', 'lot', 'of', 'spaces']

line = "first;second;third"
thing = line.split()
print(thing)
# Output : ['first;second;third']

print(len(thing))
# Output : 1

thing = line.split(";")
print(thing)
# Output : ['first', 'second', 'third']

print(len(thing))
# Output : 3
```

`join` is the inverse of split. It takes a list of strings and concatenates the elements. join is a string method, so you have to invoke it on the delimiter and pass the list as a parameter. In this case the delimiter is a space character, so join puts a space between words. To concatenate strings without spaces, you can use the empty string, "", as a delimiter.

```python
t = ['pining', 'for', 'the', 'fjords']
delimiter = ' '
delimiter.join(t)
# Output : 'pining for the fjords'
```

## Parsing lines
Usually when we are reading a file we want to do something to the lines other than just printing the whole line. Often we want to find the "interesting lines" and then parse the line to find some interesting part of the line.

```python
fhand = open("mbox-short.txt")
for line in fhand :
	line = line.rstrip()
	if not line.startswith("From ") : continue
	words = line.split()
	print(words[2])
# Output :
# Sat
# Fri
# Fri
```

```python
line = "From stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za Sat Jan  5 09:14:16 2008"
words = line.split()
print(words)
# Output :
# ['From', 'stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za', 'Sat', 'Jan', '5', '09:14:16', '2008']
```

## The Double Split Pattern
Sometimes we split a line one way, and then grab one of the pieces of the line and split that piece again.


```python
line = "From stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za Sat Jan  5 09:14:16 2008"
words = line.split()
email = words[1]
print(email)
# Output : stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za

pieces = email.split("@")
print(pieces)
# Output : ['stephen.marquard', 'uct.ac.za']

print(pieces[1])
# Output : uct.ac.za
```
