# 3.1 Chapter 11 - Regular Expressions
In computing, a regular expression, also referred to as "regex" or "regexp", provides a concise and flexible means for matching strings of text, such as particular characters, words, or patterns of characters. A regular expression is written in a formal language that can be interpreted by a regular expression processor.

Regular expressions are almost their own little programming language for searching and parsing strings. As a matter of fact, entire books have been written on the topic of regular expressions. In this chapter, we will only cover the basics of regular expressions.

## Understanding Regular Expressions
* Very powerful and quite crypic
* Fun once you understand them
* Regular expressions are a language unto themselves
* A language of "marker charachters" - programming with characters
* It is kin of an "old school" language - compact

#### Regular Expression Quick Guide

Character | Use |
--- | --- |
^ | Matches the beginning of a line
$ | Matches the end of the line
. | Matches any character
\s | Matches whitespace
\S | Matches non-whitespace character
* | Repeats a character zero or more times
* ?  | Repeats a character zero or more times (non-greedy)
+  | Repeats a character one or more times
+?  | Repeats a character one or mote times (non-greedy)
[aeiou]  | Matches a single character in the listed
[^XYZ]  | Matches a single character not in the listed set
[a-z0-9]  | The set of characters can include a range
(  | Indicates where string extraction is to start
)  | Indicates where string extraction is to end


## The Regular Expression Module

 Before you can use regular expressions in your program, you must import the library using **"import re"**. The simplest use of the regular expression library is the `search()` function.

 You can use `re.search()` to see if a string matches a regular expression, similar to using the `find()` method for strings

 You can use `re.findall()` to extract portions of a string that match your regular expression, similar to a combination of `find()` and slicing: `var[5:10]`

#### Using `re.search()` like `find()`

We open the file, loop through each line, and use the regular expression `search()` to only print out lines that contain the string **"From:"**. This program does not use the real power of regular expressions, since we could have just as easily used `line.find()` to accomplish the same result.

```python
# find()
hand = open("mbox-short.txt")
for line in hand:
	line = line.rstrip()
	if line.find("From:") >= 0:
		print(line)

# Output :
# From: stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za
# From: louis@media.berkeley.edu
# From: zqian@umich.edu
# From: rjlowe@iupui.edu
# ...


# re.search()
import re
hand = open("mbox-short.txt")
for line in hand:
  line = line.strip()
  if re.search("From:", line):
    print(line)

# Output :
# From: stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za
# From: louis@media.berkeley.edu
# From: zqian@umich.edu
# From: rjlowe@iupui.edu
# ...
```
The power of the regular expressions comes when we add special characters to the search string that allow us to more precisely control which lines match the string. Adding these special characters to our regular expression allow us to do sophisticated matching and extraction while writing very little code.

We fine-tune what is matched by adding special characters to the string. We will only match lines that start with the string **"From:"**. This is still a very simple example that we could have done equivalently with the `startswith()` method from the string library. But it serves to introduce the notion that regular expressions contain special action characters that give us more control as to what will match the regular expression.

```python
# startswith()
hand = open("mbox-short.txt")
for line in hand:
	line = line.rstrip()
	if line.startswith("From:"):
		print(line)

# Output :
# From: stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za
# From: louis@media.berkeley.edu
# From: zqian@umich.edu
# From: rjlowe@iupui.edu
# ...


# re.search()
import re
hand = open("mbox-short.txt")
for line in hand:
  line = line.strip()
  if re.search("^From:", line):
    print(line)

# Output :
# From: stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za
# From: louis@media.berkeley.edu
# From: zqian@umich.edu
# From: rjlowe@iupui.edu
# ...
```

## Wild-Card Characters
There are a number of other special characters that let us build even more powerful regular expressions. The most commonly used special character is the period or full stop, which matches any character.


This is particularly powerful when combined with the ability to indicate that a character can be repeated any number of times using the `*` or `+` characters in your regular expression. These special characters mean that instead of matching a single character in the search string, they match zero-or-more characters (in the case of the asterisk) or one-or-more of the characters (in the case of the plus sign).

```python
# Search for lines that start with 'F', followed by
# 2 characters, followed by 'm:'
import re
hand = open('mbox-short.txt')
for line in hand:
    line = line.rstrip()
    if re.search('^F..m:', line):
        print(line)
# Output :
# From: stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za
# From: louis@media.berkeley.edu
# From: zqian@umich.edu
# From: rjlowe@iupui.edu
# ...
```

The dot character matches any character.

```
X-Sieve: CMU Sieve 2.3
X-DSPAM-Result: Innocent
X-DSPAM-Confidence: 0.8475
X-Content-Type-Message-Body: text/plain
```

`^X.*:` -> It means "start with X follow by any character(s) and followed by a colon"


#### Fine-Tuning Your Match
Depending on how "clean" your data is and the purpose of your application, you may want to narrow your match down a bit

```
X-Sieve: CMU Sieve 2.3
X-DSPAM-Result: Innocent
X-Plane is behind schedule: two weeks
```

`^X-\S+:` -> Means "starts with X-, followed by any non-whitespace character one or more times, followed by a colon"


## Matching and Extracting Data
`re.search()` returns a True/False depending on whether the string matches the regular expression. If we actually want the matching strings to be extracted, we use `re.findall()`

```python
import re
x = "My 2 favorite numbers are 19 and 42"
y = re.findall("[0-9]+", x)
print(y)
# Output : ['2', '19', '42']

import re
x = "My 2 favorite numbers are 19 and 42"
y = re.findall("[0-9]", x)
print(y)
# Output : ['2', '1', '9', '4', '2']
```

When we use `re.findall()`, it returns a list of zero or more sub-strings that match the regular expression

```python
import re
x = "My 2 favorite numbers are 19 and 42"
y = re.findall("[AEIOU]+", x)
print(y)
# Output : []

y = re.findall("[a]", x)
print(y)
# Output : ['a', 'a', 'a']
```

#### Warning : Greedy Matching
The repeat characters (* and +) push outward in both directions (greedy) to match the largest possible string

```python
import re
x = "From: Using the : character"
y = re.findall("^F.+:", x)
print(y)
# Output :
# ['From: Using the :']
```

#### Non-Greedy Matching
Not all regular expression repeat codes are greedy! If you add a ? character, the + and * chill out a bit.


```python
import re
x = "From: Using the : character"
y = re.findall("^F.+?:", x)
print(y)
# Output :
# ['From:']
```


#### Fine-Tuning String Extraction
You can refine the match for `re.findall()` and separately determine which portion of the match is to be extracted by using parentheses

`From stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za Sat Jan  5 09:14:16 2008`

```python
y = re.findall('\S+@\S+', x)
print(y)
# Output :
# ['stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za']
```

`\S+@\S+` -> Find everything that matches a one or more non-black character followed bby an @ sign

Parentheses are another special character in regular expressions. When you add parentheses to a regular expression, they are ignored when matching the string. But when you are using `findall()`, parentheses indicate that while you want the whole expression to match, you only are interested in extracting a portion of the substring that matches the regular expression.

```python
import re
x = "From stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za Sat Jan  5 09:14:16 2008"
y = re.findall('\S+@\S+', x)
print(y)
# Output :
# ['stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za']

y = re.findall('^From (\S+@\S+)', x)
print(y)
# Output :
# ['stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za']
```


#### The Double Split Pattern
In old studies we do like this :

```python
data = "From stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za Sat Jan  5 09:14:16 2008"
atpos = data.find('@')
print(atpos)
# Output : 21
sppos = data.find(' ', atpos)
print(sppos)
# Output : 31
host = data[atpos+1 : sppos]
print(host)
# Output : uct.ac.za
```

Sometimes we split a line one way, and then grab one of the pieces of the line and split that piece again.

```python
line = "From stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za Sat Jan  5 09:14:16 2008"
words = line.split()
email = words[1]
pieces = email.split('@')
print(pieces[1])
# Output : uct.ac.za
```

#### The Regex Version
`@([^ ]*)` -> Find @ sign, followed by some number of non-blank characters

```python
import re
lin = "From stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za Sat Jan  5 09:14:16 2008"
y = re.findall('@([^ ]*)', lin)
print(y)
# Output : ['uct.ac.za']
```

Even cooler regex version

```python
import re
lin = "From stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za Sat Jan  5 09:14:16 2008"
y = re.findall('^From .*@([^ ]*)', lin)
print(y)
# Output : ['uct.ac.za']
```


## Spam Confidence

```python
import re
hand = open('mbox-short.txt')
numlist = list()
for line in hand:
  line = line.rstrip()
  stuff = re.findall('^X-DSPAM-Confidence: ([0-9.]+)', line)
  if len(stuff) != 1: continue
  num = float(stuff[0])
  numlist.append(num)
print(numlist)
# Output :
# [0.8475, 0.6178, 0.6961, 0.7565, 0.7626, 0.7556, 0.7002, 0.7615, 0.7601, 0.7605, 0.6959, 0.7606, 0.7559, 0.7605, 0.6932, 0.7558, 0.6526, 0.6948, 0.6528, 0.7002, 0.7554, 0.6956, 0.6959, 0.7556, 0.9846, 0.8509, 0.9907]
print('Maximum:', max(numlist))
# Output :
# Maximum: 0.9907
```

## Escape Character
Since we use special characters in regular expressions to match the beginning or end of a line or specify wild cards, we need a way to indicate that these characters are "normal" and we want to match the actual character such as a dollar sign or caret. We can indicate that we want to simply match a character by prefixing that character with a '\'

```python
import re
x = "We just received $10.00 for cookies."
y = re.findall("\$[0-9.]+", x)
print(y)
# Output : ['$10.00']
```
