# Python Basics
*Coursera | Python 3 Programming Specialization | Course 1*

## Week 1 : Introduction to the Specialization
### 1.20. Syntax, Runtime, and Semantic Errors

**Syntax Errors**

Python can only execute a program if the program is syntactically correct; otherwise, the process fails and returns an error message. **Syntax** refers to the structure of a program and the rules about that structure. For example, in English, a sentence must begin with a capital letter and end with a period. this sentence contains a **syntax error**. So does this one

For most readers, a few syntax errors are not a significant problem, which is why we can read the poetry of e. e. cummings without problems. Python is not so forgiving. If there is a single syntax error anywhere in your program, Python will display an error message and quit. You will not be able to complete the execution of your program. During the first few weeks of your programming career, you will probably spend a lot of time tracking down syntax errors. However, as you gain experience, you will make fewer errors and you will also be able to find your errors faster.

Can you spot the syntax error in the code below?

```
print("Hello World!"
```

**Output** :

```
SyntaxError: EOF in multi-line statement on line 3

^
```

**Runtime Errors**

The second type of error is a runtime error, so called because the error does not appear until you run the program. These errors are also called exceptions because they usually indicate that something exceptional (and bad) has happened.

Runtime errors are rare in the simple programs you will see in the first few chapters, so it might be a while before you encounter one.

**Semantic Errors**

The third type of error is the ***semantic error***. If there is a semantic error in your program, it will run successfully in the sense that the computer will not generate any error messages. However, your program will not do the right thing. It will do something else. Specifically, it will do what you told it to do.

The problem is that the program you wrote is not the program you wanted to write. The meaning of the program (its semantics) is wrong. Identifying semantic errors can be tricky because it requires you to work backward by looking at the output of the program and trying to figure out what it is doing.
