# Python Basics
*Coursera | Python 3 Programming Specialization | Course 1*

## Week 1 : Introduction to the Specialization
### 1.3. Operators and Operands

| Operator | Operate | Form |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| `+` | addition | `a + b` |
| `-` | subtraction | `a - b` |
| `*` | multiplication | `a * b` |
| `/` | division | `a / b` |
| `//` | division without remainder | `a // b` |
| `%` | remainder | `a % b` |
| `**` | exponentiation | `a ** b` |

You can build complex expressions out of simpler ones using operators. Operators are special tokens that represent computations like addition, multiplication and division. The values the operator works on are called **operands**.

The following are all legal Python expressions whose meaning is more or less clear:

```python
20 + 32
5 ** 2
(5 + 9) * (15 - 7)
```

The tokens `+`, `-`, and `*`, and the use of parentheses for grouping, mean in Python what they mean in mathematics. The asterisk `(*)` is the token for multiplication, and `**` is the token for exponentiation. Addition, subtraction, multiplication, and exponentiation all do what you expect.

Remember that if we want to see the results of the computation, the program needs to specify that with the word `print`. The first three computations occur, but their results are not printed out.

In Python 3, which we will be using, the division operator `/` produces a floating point result if the result is not an integer (e.g., `1/2`). If you want truncated division, you can use the `//` operator.

```python
print(9 / 5)
print(5 / 9)
print(9 // 5)
```
**Output** :
```
1.8
0.5555555555555556
1
```


Pay particular attention to the examples above. Note that `9//5` truncates rather than rounding, so it produces the value 1 rather 2.

The integer division operator, `//`, also works on floating point numbers. It truncates to the nearest integer, but still produces a floating point result. Thus `7.0 // 3.0` is `2.0`.

```python
print(7.0 / 3.0)
print(7.0 // 3.0)
```

**Output** :

```
2.3333333333333335
2.0
```

The **modulus operator**, sometimes also called the **remainder operator** or **integer remainder operator** works on integers (and integer expressions) and yields the remainder when the first operand is divided by the second. In Python, the modulus operator is a percent sign (`%`). The syntax is the same as for other operators.

```python
print(7 // 3)  # This is the integer division operator
print(7 % 3)   # This is the remainder or modulus operator
```

**Output** :

```
2
1
```

In the above example, 7 divided by 3 is 2 when we use integer division and there is a remainder of 1.

The modulus operator turns out to be surprisingly useful. For example, you can check whether one number is divisible by another—if `x % y` is zero, then `x` is divisible by `y`. Also, you can extract the right-most digit or digits from a number. For example, `x % 10` yields the right-most digit of `x` (in base 10). Similarly `x % 100` yields the last two digits.

```python
print(18 / 4)
print(18.0 // 4)
print(18 % 4)
```

**Output** :

```
4.5
4.0
2
```

**Order of Operations**

When more than one operator appears in an expression, the order of evaluation depends on the **rules of precedence**. Python follows the same precedence rules for its mathematical operators that mathematics does.

1. ***Parentheses*** have the highest precedence and can be used to force an expression to evaluate in the order you want. Since expressions in parentheses are evaluated first, `2 * (3-1)` is 4, and `(1+1)**(5-2)` is 8. You can also use parentheses to make an expression easier to read, as in `(minute * 100) / 60`: in this case, the parentheses don’t change the result, but they reinforce that the expression in parentheses will be evaluated first.

2. ***Exponentiation*** has the next highest precedence, so `2**1+1` is 3 and not 4, and `3*1**3` is 3 and not 27. Can you explain why?

3. ***Multiplication and both division*** operators have the same precedence, which is higher than addition and subtraction, which also have the same precedence. So `2*3-1` yields 5 rather than 4, and `5-2*2` is 1, not 6.

4. Operators with the *same* precedence are evaluated from left-to-right. In algebra we say they are ***left-associative***. So in the expression `6-3+2`, the subtraction happens first, yielding 3. We then add 2 to get the result 5. If the operations had been evaluated from right to left, the result would have been `6-(3+2)`, which is 1.

```python
print(2 * (3-1))
print((1+1)**(5-2))
print(2**1+1)
print(3*1**3)
print(2*3-1)
print(5-2*2)
print(6-3+2)
print(6-(3+2))
```

**Output** :

```
4
8
3
3
5
1
5
1
```

**Note** : Due to some historical quirk, an exception to the left-to-right left-associative rule is the exponentiation operator `**`. A useful hint is to always use parentheses to force exactly the order you want when exponentiation is involved:

```python
print(2 ** 3 ** 2)		# the right-most ** operator gets done first!
print((2 ** 3) ** 2)	# use parentheses to force the order you want!
print(16 - 2 * 5 // 3 + 1)
```

**Output** :
```
512
64
14
```

**Note**

This is a second way that parentheses are used in Python. The first way you’ve already seen is that `()` indicates a function call, with the inputs going inside the parentheses. How can Python tell when parentheses specify to call a function, and when they are just forcing the order of operations for ambiguous operator expressions?

The answer is that if there’s a an expression to the left of the parentheses that evaluates to a function object, then the parentheses indicate a function call, and otherwise not. You will have to get used to making the same inference when you see parentheses: is this a function call, or just specifying precedence?
