# Python Basics
*Coursera | Python 3 Programming Specialization | Course 1*

## Week 2 : Sequences and Iteration
### 2.1. Strings and Lists

In the real world most of the data we care about doesn’t exist on its own. Usually data is in the form of some kind of collection or sequence. For example, a grocery list helps us keep track of the individual food items we need to buy, and our todo list organizes the things we need to do each day. Notice that both the grocery list and the todo list are not even concerned with numbers as much as they are concerned with words. This is true of much of our daily life, and so Python provides us with many features to work with lists of all kinds of objects (numbers, words, etc.) as well as special kind of sequence, the character string, which you can think of as a sequence of individual letters.

So far we have seen built-in types like: `int`, `float`, and `str`. `int` and `float` are considered to be simple or primitive or atomic data types because their values are not composed of any smaller parts. They cannot be broken down.

On the other hand, strings and lists are different from the others because they are made up of smaller pieces. In the case of strings, they are made up of smaller strings each containing one **character**.

Types that are comprised of smaller pieces are called **collection data types**. Depending on what we are doing, we may want to treat a collection data type as a single entity (the whole), or we may want to access its parts. This ambiguity is useful.

In this chapter we will examine operations that can be performed on sequences, such as picking out individual elements or subsequences (called slices) or computing their length. In addition, we’ll examine some special functions that are defined only for strings, and we’ll find out one importance difference between strings and lists, that lists can be changed (or mutated) while strings are immutable.


### Strings
Strings can be defined as sequential collections of characters. This means that the individual characters that make up a string are in a particular order from left to right.

A string that contains no characters, often referred to as the **empty string**, is still considered to be a string. It is simply a sequence of zero characters and is represented by `‘’` or `“”` (two single or two double quotes with nothing in between).


### Lists
A **list** is a sequential collection of Python data values, where each value is identified by an index. The values that make up a list are called its **elements**. Lists are similar to strings, which are ordered collections of characters, except that the elements of a list can have any type and for any one list, the items can be of different types.

There are several ways to create a new list. The simplest is to enclose the elements in square brackets ( `[` and `]`).


```python
[10, 20, 30, 40]
["spam", "bungee", "swallow"]
```

The first example is a list of four integers. The second is a list of three strings. As we said above, the elements of a list don’t have to be the same type. The following list contains a string, a float, an integer, and another list.

```python
["hello", 2.0, 5, [10, 20]]
```

### Tuples

A **tuple**, like a list, is a sequence of items of any type. The printed representation of a tuple is a comma-separated sequence of values, enclosed in parentheses. In other words, the representation is just like lists, except with parentheses () instead of square brackets [].

One way to create a tuple is to write an expression, enclosed in parentheses, that consists of multiple other expressions, separated by commas.

```python
julia = ("Julia", "Roberts", 1967, "Duplicity", 2009, "Actress", "Atlanta, Georgia")
```

The key difference between lists and tuples is that a tuple is immutable, meaning that its contents can’t be changed after the tuple is created. We will examine the mutability of lists in detail in the chapter on Mutability.

To create a tuple with a single element (but you’re probably not likely to do that too often), we have to include the final comma, because without the final comma, Python treats the `(5)` below as an integer in parentheses:

```python
t = (5,)
print(type(t))

x = (5)
print(type(x))
```

**Output**:

```
<class 'tuple'>
<class 'int'>
```
