# Python Basics
*Coursera | Python 3 Programming Specialization | Course 1*

## Week 4 : Sequence Mutation and Accumulation Patterns
### 4.1. Mutability

Some Python collection types - strings and lists so far - are able to change and some are not. If a type is able to change, then it is said to be mutable. If the type is not able to change then it is said to be immutable. This will be expanded below.


#### Lists are Mutable
Unlike strings, lists are **mutable**. This means we can change an item in a list by accessing it directly as part of the assignment statement. Using the indexing operator (square brackets) on the left side of an assignment, we can update one of the list items.


```python
fruit = ["banana", "apple", "cherry"]
print(fruit)

fruit[0] = "pear"
fruit[-1] = "orange"
print(fruit)
```

**Output** :

```
['banana', 'apple', 'cherry']
['pear', 'apple', 'orange']
```

An assignment to an element of a list is called **item assignment**. Item assignment does not work for strings. Recall that strings are immutable.

By combining assignment with the slice operator we can update several elements at once.

```python
alist = ["a", "b", "c", "d", "e", "f"]
alist[1:3] = ["x", "y"]
print(alist)
```

**Output** :

```
['a', 'x', 'y', 'd', 'e', 'f']
```

We can also remove elements from a list by assigning the empty list to them.

```python
alist = ["a", "b", "c", "d", "e", "f"]
alist[1:3] = []
print(alist)
```

**Output** :

```
['a', 'd', 'e', 'f']
```

We can even insert elements into a list by squeezing them into an empty slice at the desired location.


```python
alist = ["a", "d", "f"]
alist[1:1] = ["b", "c"]
print(alist)

alist[4:4] = ["e"]
print(alist)
```

**Output** :

```
['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'f']
['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e', 'f']
```



#### Strings are Immutable

One final thing that makes strings different from some other Python collection types is that you are not allowed to modify the individual characters in the collection. It is tempting to use the `[]` operator on the left side of an assignment, with the intention of changing a character in a string. For example, in the following code, we would like to change the first letter of `greeting`.


```python
greeting = "Hello, world!"
greeting[0] = "J"
print(greeting)
```

**Output** :

```
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "Week4_Sequence_Mutation_and_Accumulation_Patterns.py", line 37, in <module>
    greeting[0] = "J"
TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment
```

Instead of producing the output `Jello, world!`, this code produces the runtime error `TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment`.

Strings are **immutable**, which means you cannot change an existing string. The best you can do is create a new string that is a variation on the original.


```python
greeting = "Hello, world!"
newGreeting = "J" + greeting[1:]
print(newGreeting)
print(greeting)
```

**Output** :

```
Jello, world!
Hello, world!
```

The solution here is to concatenate a new first letter onto a slice of greeting. This operation has no effect on the original string.

While it’s possible to make up new variable names each time we make changes to existing values, it could become difficult to keep track of them all.


```python
phrase = "many moons"
print(phrase)
phrase_expanded = phrase + " and many stars"
print(phrase_expanded)
phrase_larger = phrase_expanded + " litter"
print(phrase_larger)
phrase_complete = "M" + phrase_larger[1:] + " the night sky."
print(phrase_complete)
excited_phrase_complete = phrase_complete[:-1] + "!"
print(excited_phrase_complete)
```

**Output** :

```
many moons
many moons and many stars
many moons and many stars litter
Many moons and many stars litter the night sky.
Many moons and many stars litter the night sky!
```

The more that you change the string, the more difficult it is to come up with a new variable to use. It’s perfectly acceptable to re-assign the value to the same variable name in this case.


#### Tuples are Immutable

As with strings, if we try to use item assignment to modify one of the elements of a tuple, we get an error. In fact, that’s the key difference between lists and tuples: tuples are like immutable lists. None of the operations on lists that mutate them are available for tuples. Once a tuple is created, it can’t be changed.

```python
julia[0] = 'X'  # TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment
```

----
----

**Check Your Understanding**

**E1** : What is printed by the following statements?

```python
alist = [4, 2, 8, 6, 5]
alist[2] = True
print(alist)
```

A. [4,2,True,8,6,5] <br>
B. [4,2,True,6,5] ✅ <br>
C. Error, it is illegal to assign <br>

---

**E2** : What is printed by the following statements:

```python
s = "Ball"
s[0] = "C"
print(s)
```

A. Ball <br>
B. Call <br>
C. Error ✅ <br>

---
