# Data Collection and Processing with Python
*Coursera | Python 3 Programming Specialization | Course 3*

## Week 2 : Map, Filter, and List Comprehensions
### 2.1. Map

We have frequently taken a list and produced another list from it that contains either a subset of the items or a transformed version of each item. When each item is transformed we say that the operation is a **mapping**, or just a **map** of the original list. When some items are omitted, we call it a **filter**.

Python provides built-in functions `map` and `filter`. Python also provides a new syntax, called **list comprehensions**, that lets you express a mapping and/or filtering operation. Just as with named functions and lambda expressions, some students seem to find it easier to think in terms of the map and filter functions, while other students find it easier to read and write list comprehensions. You’ll learn both ways; one may even help you understand the other. Most python programmers use list comprehensions, so make sure you learn to read those. In this course, you can choose to learn to write list comprehensions or to use map and filter, whichever you prefer. You should learn to read both list comprehensions and map/filter.

Other common accumulator patterns on lists aggregate all the values into a single value.

Map, and filter are commands that you would use in high-performance computing on big datasets.

---

You previously were introduced to accumulating a list by transforming each of the elements. Here we revisit that pattern.

The following function produces a new list with each item in the original list doubled. It is an example of a mapping, from the original list to a new list of the same length, where each element is doubled.

```python
def doubleStuff(a_list):
	"""Return a new list in which contains doubles of the elements in a_list. """
	new_list = []
	for value in a_list:
		new_elem = 2 * value
		new_list.append(new_elem)
	return new_list

things = [2, 5, 9]
print(things)
things = doubleStuff(things)
print(things)
```


**Output** :

```
[2, 5, 9]
[4, 10, 18]
```

The `doubleStuff` function is an example of the accumulator pattern, in particular the mapping pattern. On line 3, `new_list` is initialized. On line 5, the doubled value for the current item is produced and on line 6 it is appended to the list we’re accumulating. Line 7 executes after we’ve processed all the items in the original list: it returns the `new_list`. Once again, codelens helps us to see the actual references and objects as they are passed and returned.

This pattern of computation is so common that python offers a more general way to do mappings, the `map` function, that makes it more clear what the overall structure of the computation is. `map` takes two arguments, a function and a sequence. The function is the mapper that transforms items. It is automatically applied to each item in the sequence. You don’t have to initialize an accumulator or iterate with a for loop at all.

**Note** : Technically, in a proper Python 3 interpreter, the `map` function produces an “iterator”, which is like a list but produces the items as they are needed. Most places in Python where you can use a list (e.g., in a for loop) you can use an “iterator” as if it was actually a list. So you probably won’t ever notice the difference. If you ever really need a list, you can explicitly turn the output of map into a list: `list(map(...))`. In the runestone environment, `map` actually returns a real list, but to make this code compatible with a full python environment, we always convert it to a list.

As we did when passing a function as a parameter to the `sorted` function, we can specify a function to pass to `map` either by referring to a function by name, or by providing a lambda expression.

```python
def triple(value):
	return 3*value

def tripleStuff(a_list):
	new_seq = map(triple, a_list)
	return list(new_seq)

def quadrupleStuff(a_list):
	new_seq = map(lambda value: 4*value, a_list)
	return list(new_seq)

things = [2, 5, 9]
things3 = tripleStuff(things)
print(things3)

things4 = quadrupleStuff(things)
print(things4)
```


**Output** :

```
[6, 15, 27]
[8, 20, 36]
```

Of course, once we get used to using the `map` function, it’s no longer necessary to define functions like `tripleStuff` and `quadrupleStuff`.

```python
things = [2, 5, 9]

things4 = list(map(lambda value: 4*value, things))
print(things4)

print(list(map(lambda value: 5*value, [1, 2, 3])))
```


**Output** :

```
[8, 20, 36]
[5, 10, 15]
```

-------
--------

**Check Your Understanding**

**Q1** : Using map, create a list assigned to the variable `greeting_doubled` that doubles each element in the list `lst`.

```python
# Given
lst = [["hi", "bye"], "hello", "goodbye", [9, 2], 4]


# Solution
greeting_doubled = list(map(lambda x: x*2, lst))
print(greeting_doubled)
```

**Output** :

```
[['hi', 'bye', 'hi', 'bye'], 'hellohello', 'goodbyegoodbye', [9, 2, 9, 2], 8]
```

------


**Q2** : Below, we have provided a list of strings called `abbrevs`. Use map to produce a new list called `abbrevs_upper` that contains all the same strings in upper case.

```python
# Given
abbrevs = ["usa", "esp", "chn", "jpn", "mex", "can", "rus", "rsa", "jam"]



# Solution
abbrevs_upper = list(map(lambda x: x.upper(), abbrevs))
print(abbrevs_upper)
```

**Output** :

```
['USA', 'ESP', 'CHN', 'JPN', 'MEX', 'CAN', 'RUS', 'RSA', 'JAM']
```

------
