# Data Collection and Processing with Python
*Coursera | Python 3 Programming Specialization | Course 3*

## Week 2 : Map, Filter, and List Comprehensions
### 2.3. List Comprehensions

Python provides an alternative way to do `map` and `filter` operations, called a **list comprehension**. Many programmers find them easier to understand and write. List comprehensions are concise ways to create lists from other lists. The general syntax is:


```python
[<transformer_expression> for <loop_var> in <sequence> if <filtration_expression>]
```

where the if clause is optional. For example,

```python
things = [2, 5, 9]
yourlist = [value * 2 for value in things]
print(yourlist)
```

**Output** :

```
[4, 10, 18]
```

The transformer expression is `value * 2`. The item variable is `value` and the sequence is `things`. This is an alternative way to perform a mapping operation. As with `map`, each item in the sequence is transformed into an item in the new list. Instead of the iteration happening automatically, however, we have adopted the syntax of the for loop which may make it easier to understand.

Just as in a regular for loop, the part of the statement `for value in things` says to execute some code once for each item in things. Each time that code is executed, `value` is bound to one item from `things`. The code that is executed each time is the transformer expression, `value * 2`, rather than a block of code indented underneath the for statement. The other difference from a regular for loop is that each time the expression is evaluated, the resulting value is appended to a list. That happens automatically, without the programmer explicitly initializing an empty list or appending each item.

The `if` clause of a list comprehension can be used to do a filter operation. To perform a pure filter operation, the expression can be simply the variable that is bound to each item. For example, the following list comprehension will keep only the even numbers from the original list.

```python
def keep_evens(nums):
	new_list = [num for num in nums if num % 2 == 0]
	return new_list

print(keep_evens([3, 4, 6, 7, 0, 1]))
```

**Output** :

```
[4, 6, 0]
```

You can also combine `map` and `filter` operations by chaining them together, or with a single list comprehension.


```python
things = [3, 4, 6, 7, 0, 1]

print(list(map(lambda x: x*2, filter(lambda y: y % 2 == 0, things))))
print([x * 2 for x in things if x % 2 == 0])
```

**Output** :

```
[8, 12, 0]
[8, 12, 0]
```

-------
--------

**Check Your Understanding**

**Q1** : What is printed by the following statements?

```python
alist = [4,2,8,6,5]
blist = [num*2 for num in alist if num%2==1]
print(blist)
```

A. [4,2,8,6,5]  <br>
B. [8,4,16,12,10]  <br>
C. 10  <br>
D. [10]  ✅ <br>

------

**Q2** : The for loop below produces a list of numbers greater than 10. Below the given code, use list comprehension to accomplish the same thing. Assign it the the variable `lst2`. Only one line of code is needed.

```python
# Given
L = [12, 34, 21, 4, 6, 9, 42]
lst = []
for x in L:
    if x > 10:
        lst.append(x)
print(lst)


# Solution
lst2 = [x for x in L if x > 10]
print(lst2)
```


**Output** :

```
[12, 34, 21, 42]
[12, 34, 21, 42]
```

------

**Q3** : Write code to assign to the variable `compri` all the values of the key `name` in any of the sub-dictionaries in the dictionary `tester`. Do this using a list comprehension.

```python
# Given
tester = {'info': [{"name": "Lauren", 'class standing': 'Junior', 'major': "Information Science"},
									{'name': 'Ayo', 'class standing': "Bachelor's", 'major': 'Information Science'},
									{'name': 'Kathryn', 'class standing': 'Senior', 'major': 'Sociology'},
									{'name': 'Nick', 'class standing': 'Junior', 'major': 'Computer Science'},
									{'name': 'Gladys', 'class standing': 'Sophomore', 'major': 'History'},
									{'name': 'Adam', 'major': 'Violin Performance', 'class standing': 'Senior'}]}


# Solution
compri = [x["name"] for x in tester["info"]]
print(compri)
```


**Output** :

```
['Lauren', 'Ayo', 'Kathryn', 'Nick', 'Gladys', 'Adam']
```

------
