# Data Collection and Processing with Python
*Coursera | Python 3 Programming Specialization | Course 3*

## Week 3 : Internet APIs
### 3.3. Fetching a page

The web works with a metaphor of “pages”. When you put a URL into a browser, you see a “page” of content.

For example, if you visit https://github.com/RunestoneInteractive/RunestoneServer, you will see the home page for the open source project whose contents are used to run this online textbook.

The browser is just a computer program that fetches the contents and displays them in a nice way. If you want to see what the contents are, in plain text, right click your mouse on the page and select `View source`, or whatever the equivalent is in your browser.


#### Fetching in python with `requests.get`

You don’t need to use a browser to fetch the contents of a page, though. In Python, there’s a module available, called `requests`. You can use the `get` function in the `requests` module to fetch the contents of a page.

**Note** : For illustration purposes, try visiting https://api.datamuse.com/words?rel_rhy=funny in your browser. It returns data in JSON format, not in HTML. Your browser will display the results, information about some words that rhyme with “funny”, but it won’t look like a normal web page. Then try running the code below to fetch the same text string in a python program. Try changing “funny” to some other word, both in the browser, and in the code below. You’ll see that, either way, you are retrieving the same thing, the datamuse API’s response to your request for words that rhyme with some word that you are sending as a query parameter.


```python
import requests
import json

page = requests.get("https://api.datamuse.com/words?rel_rhy=funny")
print(type(page))
print(page.text[:150]) # print the first 150 characters
print(page.url) # print the url that was fetched
print("------")
x = page.json() # turn page.text into a python object
print(type(x))
print("---first item in the list---")
print(x[0])
print("---the whole list, pretty printed---")
print(json.dumps(x, indent=2)) # pretty print the results
```

**Output** :

```
<class 'requests.models.Response'>
[{"word":"money","score":4477,"numSyllables":2},{"word":"honey","score":1228,"numSyllables":2},{"word":"sunny","score":737,"numSyllables":2},{"word":"
https://api.datamuse.com/words?rel_rhy=funny
-----------
<class 'list'>
--- first item in the list ---
{'word': 'money', 'score': 4477, 'numSyllables': 2}
--- the whole list, pretty printed ---
[
  {
    "word": "money",
    "score": 4477,
    "numSyllables": 2
  },
  {
    "word": "honey",
    "score": 1228,
    "numSyllables": 2
  },
  {
    "word": "sunny",
    "score": 737,
    "numSyllables": 2
  },
  {
    "word": "bunny",
    "score": 718,
    "numSyllables": 2
  },
  {
    "word": "blini",
    "score": 629,
    "numSyllables": 2
  },
  {
    "word": "gunny",
    "score": 458,
    "numSyllables": 2
  },
...
...
```


Once we run `requests.get`, a python object is returned. It’s an instance of a class called Response that is defined in the requests module. We won’t look at it’s definition. Think of it as analogous to the Turtle class. Each instance of the class has some attributes; different instances have different values for the same attribute. All instances can also invoke certain methods that are defined for the class.

The Response object has only two attributes that are set, and one method that can be invoked.

* The `.text` attribute. It contains the contents of the file or other information available from the url (or sometimes an error message).
* The `.url` attribute. We will see later that `requests.get` takes an optional second parameter that is used to add some characters to the end of the base url that is the first parameter. The .url attribute displays the full url that was generated from the input parameters. It can be helpful for debugging purposes; you can print out the URL, paste it into a browser, and see exactly what was returned.
* The `.json()` method. This converts the text into a python list or dictionary, by passing the contents of the .text attribute to the `jsons.loads` function.
* The `.status_code` attribute.
	* When a server thinks that it is sending back what was requested, it sends the code 200.
	* When the requested page doesn’t exist, it sends back code 404, which is sometimes described as “File Not Found”.
	* When the page has moved to a different location, it sends back code 301 and a different URL where the client is supposed to retrieve from. In the full implementation of the `requests` module, the `get` function is so smart that when it gets a 301, it looks at the new url and fetches it. For example, github redirects all requests using http to the corresponding page using https (the secure http protocol). Thus, when we ask for http://github.com/presnick/runestone, github sends back a 301 code and the url https://github.com/presnick/runestone. The requests.get function then fetches the other url. It reports a status of 200 and the updated url. We have to do further inquire to find out that a redirection occurred (see below).
* The `.headers` attribute has as its value a dictionary consisting of keys and values. To find out all the headers, you can run the code and add a statement `print(p.headers.keys())`. One of the headers is ‘Content-type’. Some possible values are `text/html; charset-utf-8` and `application/json; charset=utf-8`.
* The `.history` attribute contains a list of previous responses, if there were redirects.


To summarize, a Response object, in the full implementation of the `requests` module has the following useful attributes that can be accessed in your program:

* `.text`
* `.url`
* `.json()`
* `.status_code`
* `.headers`
* `.history`

----
